Journey to the ISS
Part 2: The Soyuz rendezvous and docking
Welcome, I am Alexander Gerst
an astronaut of the
European Space Agency.
I am talking to you from the
International Space Station.
My journey here aboard
a Soyuz spacecraft
from lift-off in Kazakhstan
to the time we docked just
took over about 5 hours.
The video you are about to see
contains some unique footage
taken inside the capsule
while it is in orbit
and explains how the Soyuz
safely reaches orbit
and docks to the Space Station.
Many other astronauts have
taken the same journey
and some of them will also share their
experience with you in this video.
Have fun watching it.
Nine minutes ago, a
Soyuz spacecraft
blasted into orbit from
Baikonur in Kazakhstan.
It is now speeding
around the Earth
thirty times faster
than a jumbo jet.
It has a single purpose:
to catch up with,
rendezvous, and dock with the
International Space Station
located somewhere 400
km above the ground.
The astronauts just went through the
last phase of the launch sequence
the separation of the Soyuz
spacecraft from the rocket.
[NESPOLI] The finishing of the engine
of the shut-down of the engine
is pretty strong.
[DE WINNE] And immediately
afterwards, of course, you float.
It's really a very nice
feeling that you know
yes, we are in space,
we had a successful launch,
now we are on the way
to the Space Station.
[DE WINNE] You can look outside the
window, you see this magnificent Earth
for the first time from above.
It's really a great feeling.
[PARMITANO] And then
just the absolute beauty
of the sun coming up really quickly,
illuminating, bursting into flame.
Now in their first
orbits around Earth
at an insertion altitude
of about 220 km,
The three astronauts in the Soyuz
certainly have a wonderful view.
But there is work to be done, as they
are still hundreds of kilometres away
from the ISS -- their
final destination.
The International Space
Station began life in 1998
and has been orbiting Earth about
once every 90 minutes ever since.
The orbital plane of the
ISS is fairly constant,
while the Earth is always rotating.
Projecting the orbit of
the ISS onto a 2D map,
we see a series of intersecting curves.
The Mission Control Centres
in Moscow and Houston
constantly monitor the
position of the ISS,
and can predict its expected
location in the orbit
for any given time
in the future.
This is important for determining
when the Soyuz spacecraft launches.
While it is technically possible to
launch the Soyuz rocket at any time,
it's most efficient to do so
shortly after the ISS orbit
passes over the Baikonur
Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.
This shortens the amount of time to
rendezvous and dock with the Station
from about two days
to only six hours.
This short rendezvous trajectory
has been implemented since 2013.
However, if the Soyuz rocket
misses the necessary launch window
or any of the upcoming engine
burns do not occur as planned,
the spacecraft has enough
extra fuel to revert
to a two-day long rendezvous.
This happened in March of 2014 because
of an attitude control problem,
and thus, the rendezvous was replanned
to the formerly used long trajectory.
[PARMITANO] You take into consideration
that there are some risks,
some are worse than others, including
the possibility of transitioning
from a very short docking
to a long docking,
which was the standard
until a year ago.
We know of the possibility; it's
something that we are trained for.
We know that the spacecraft has everything
that we need for those two days,
and we know how to react.
Rendezvous is defined as
the sequence of manoeuvres
governing the approach of two
space vehicles to one another.
In most cases one of them is the
chaser, performing the manoeuvres,
in this case, the Soyuz,
while the second is a
passive target vehicle,
in this case, the
International Space Station.
Ideally, both vehicles meet up safely
at an exact preselected
point in space and time.
But how does the Soyuz achieve this?
Well, the Soyuz has to climb from
its initial insertion altitude
up to the same altitude
of the Station,
and then join and stay on this orbit.
It sounds like a simple enough task,
but it cannot be done
in one single manoeuvre
starting from the insertion altitude.
Calculations for the final docking are
based on a precise initial Soyuz altitude
and unfortunately, the exact insertion
orbit altitude is not known in advance
because of some unpredictability
in the rocket launch.
Therefore, two manoeuvres are used
with an intermediate
phasing orbit in between.
The phasing orbit is the basis for
the final docking calculations.
It is reached using the first
manoeuvre, called a Hohmann transfer,
named after a German scientist from
the beginning of the 20th century.
During the Hohmann transfer, the
Soyuz has to use its engines twice.
The first time is to leave
its current insertion orbit
shortly after launch and transfer
up to the phasing orbit.
The second time is to get
the vehicle traveling
at the right speed to stay on that orbit.
The phasing orbit is lower than
the ISS orbit by about 100 km
and it serves a very specific purpose.
It decreases the phasing
angle, or the angle between
the two spacecraft in
their respective orbits.
Here we see the Soyuz
orbiting in the phasing orbit,
depicted in yellow,
while the ISS is orbiting
in a higher orbit,
depicted in green.
The third red orbit is the insertion orbit
the Soyuz has already left.
Because the Soyuz is on a lower orbit
it will travel faster than the Station.
Therefore, the Soyuz
uses this phasing orbit
to catch up with the ISS.
Depending on whether the long or short
rendezvous approach is being used,
the Soyuz will remain in this phasing orbit
for close to two days, or just a few hours,
however long it takes to reach
the desired phasing angle.
Meanwhile, the crew haven't just been
enjoying the views and weightlessness,
they've been busy with leak checks
and making sure systems
are performing nominally.
Then they issue the command
for docking probe extension
in advanced preparation for
the final docking sequence.
As soon as the pressure integrity
of the vehicle is confirmed,
the Mission Control Centre gives
the go-ahead for the crew
to loosen their seatbelts,
open their helmets,
and take off their gloves.
<<Oh, that's much better.>>
Once they reach the phasing orbit,
the crew finally have some
well-deserved downtime,
especially those completing the
two-day long rendezvous trajectory.
[DE WINNE] There are what
we call five deaf orbits.
It's five orbits in which the crew
cannot have contact with the ground
because the orbit of the Soyuz is not
passing over Russia, and you only have
contact with the ground when you're
passing over Russia with the Soyuz.
So you are completely on yourself.
So it's actually a nice time for the
crew, because you cannot be disturbed,
nobody can give you tasks, you
can do whatever you want.
Luckily for the astronauts, the Soyuz
is designed so they are not confined
to their seats for the entire trip.
Though small, the spacecraft allows
the astronauts to move freely
between the accessible modules.
The Soyuz has three compartments:
the Orbital Module,
the Descent Module, and the
Instrument Compartment.
Each compartment has a different
architecture, and a specific purpose.
The Orbital Module, or living compartment,
is equipped with sleeping
bags, food, and a toilet.
[WILLIAMS] So here
we are in the Soyuz.
This is what we call the БО,
the living compartment,
"бытовой отсек" in Russian.
It also has a little bathroom, it's
not as good as the other bathrooms
so we try not to use it too much.
It has drinking water in it
if we need something to drink,
and then, of course, it's filled
up with a lot of cargo for us.
The Instrument Compartment, not
accessible to the astronauts,
houses the oxygen and propellant tanks,
thrusters, the on-board computer,
and a number of sensors.
From the Descent Module, the three
crewmembers monitor all information
about the spacecraft and the ISS
from ground data, the on-board
computers, and an optical display
of the view from a periscope
mounted on the outside.
For the second orbital transfer and
the final rendezvous manoeuvres,
the astronauts return to
their seats in this module.
The second orbital transfer brings
the Soyuz from the phasing orbit
up to the ISS orbit.
It's called a bielliptic transfer,
and requires three engine burns
instead of the Hohmann's two.
From the phasing orbit, the
first two burns bring the Soyuz
up to the ISS orbit.
The third burn gets the vehicle
traveling at the correct speed
to stay in the ISS orbit.
The burns of the bielliptic transfer are
calculated based on the precise altitude
of the phasing orbit. Consequently, if
the phasing orbit is too high or too low
the Soyuz will not meet up
with the ISS as expected.
The reason for using a bielliptic transfer
here instead of the Hohmann's is that
the Soyuz will not only reach the correct
altitude in the close vicinity of the ISS,
but also with exactly the desired speed.
Despite these precise manoeuvres, what if
the thrusters fail to slow down the Soyuz
and the vehicle travels too
fast as it approaches the ISS?
This could end in disaster, with the Soyuz
crashing into the Station
instead of docking.
To prevent this from
happening the Soyuz performs
an additional side burn.
This changes its orbital plane slightly
and makes a collision between
the two vehicles impossible.
Throughout the rendezvous process,
the Soyuz on-board computer
continually determines the position
and velocity of the Soyuz itself
and of the ISS.
To do so, it uses measurements
provided by the ground controllers
and a radar system called the Kurs.
In this way, all of the
burns during the rendezvous
are calculated and automated
by the on-board computer.
[NESPOLI] So Soyuz navigates in space and
looks for the Station with a special
radar system, which is called the Kurs.
This gets turned on at
400 km from the Station
it looks, looks, looks, and usually
it sees the Station and
locks into the Station
at around, more or less, 180 kilometres.
At that distance, we really
don't see the Station.
It's probably -- even if you
could see it, it's probably
similar to any of the stars
that are up there in space.
But you see on the screen the
lock, the software indication
that the radar locked into the Station.
The third and final burn of the
pre-mentioned bielliptic transfer
is very important, because
it sets the vehicle up
for its near-ISS rendezvous
procedures that will lead to docking.
[DE WINNE] When you do a normal burn, well
the vehicle rotates to the correct attitude
at two degrees per second, and
then it takes about eight minutes
to start the burn.
When you're close to the Space
Station and you have to brake,
of course this would not work.
So then the vehicle all of a
sudden starts rotating quite fast,
three and a half degrees per second
and only just after that,
50 seconds after that
you already have the burn.
And once the burn is completed, immediately
the vehicle starts rotating again
to the normal orientation,
and the crew has to monitor
this quite intensely
and these are really high peaks of workload
to see that everything is okay,
the rotation is going okay,
you know that you have the burn,
the burn values were okay,
you rotate back, and then you see back
the Space Station in your main display.
[NESPOLI] We could see
it, first a dot a little
bit brighter than the
other stars in the sky,
and then little by little, we start
to see like a little spider first
with all the solar arrays and everything,
and then it was apparent that there's a
huge outpost right there in front of us.
During this stage, the crew
commander, sitting in the middle
gives vital information and
instructions to his crewmates.
Their workload has increased; many
parameters need to be checked
and systems activated.
Days before launch, a team
of flight dynamics experts
at the Mission Control Centres
in Moscow and Houston
determine the ideal position
and orientation of the ISS,
based on a careful analysis
of the constraints
that could affect these final
stages of the rendezvous timeline.
First, there must be adequate lighting
conditions at the time of docking
so that the Soyuz crew can see the ISS
without being blinded
or blocked by the sun.
[NESPOLI] It depends if the Station
is illuminated, is in the sun,
then you can see it even if
you are relatively far away.
But if the Station is not in the sun, then
you cannot see it even if you are close.
Additionally, major temperature
fluctuations of ISS elements,
such as the solar arrays,
must be avoided
to prevent structural deformation.
Finally, there must be clear
communication pathways
between the ground, Soyuz, and ISS.
The rendezvous is a fully automated process
performed by the on-board computer.
However, the commander still
takes the hand controller
just in case there is a need to
perform a contingency manual docking.
[DE WINNE] If you don't see the Space Station
or something happens at that moment,
then you might have to take manual control.
And so you have to remember very well,
where is the Space Station now,
what are the actions
that I'm going to take,
and this is really the
intense moments that happen.
Manual docking requires two hand
controllers to pilot the vehicle,
a left one that control translation and
a right one that controls rotation.
The crew are thoroughly trained in
these manual docking procedures,
even training until the very last
days before launch in Baikonur.
Besides contingency docking, the crew might
also utilize their manual control training
during redocking manoeuvres.
The ISS is constantly visited
by manned Soyuz vehicles
and other unmanned supply ships.
Sometimes it is necessary
to undock an attached Soyuz
and redock it to another port on the ISS
to make room for one of these new ships.
Luca Parmitano did this
as part of Expedition 37.
[PARMITANO] My crew was one of the few
crews able to perform a manual docking
and it went very smoothly.
We were excited because it's something
that we trained on for a long time
and we were able to do it.
Apart from this case, a routine
docking sequence is fully automated
and the crew's main task is to monitor the
systems to ensure nominal procedures.
At this stage during routine docking
the vehicle's relative speed
continues to decrease,
as does the distance between the two.
[DE WINNE] 400 metres from the
Space Station, a new phase enters.
This is the phase what we call fly-around.
During this phase, the vehicle is actually
not pointing at the desired docking port,
but at either one of the
Station's Kurs antennas.
It's only when the vehicle reaches
its 150 m station keeping mode
that the orientation changes to point
at the selected docking port instead.
The Soyuz then performs a second
fly-around to align with the docking port
while keeping a distance of 150 m.
Once aligned with the docking
port, the crew issues the command
for the last stage: the final approach.
The Soyuz computer display
uses data from Kurs
to provide the astronauts
with pertinent information
about the rendezvous and
docking manoeuvres.
Among other read-outs, the distance
from the ISS is displayed,
here showing five metres,
as is the relative velocity
during the approach,
currently 10 cm/s.
This and other information is
overlaid on the video feed,
used to track alignment of the target.
<<Five metres, zero, one, two... target
in the centre, cross-hairs aligned.>>
<<Standing by for contact and capture
of the International Space Station.>>
Contact occurs as soon as the probe touches
the entrance cone of the docking hatch.
Then the thrusters give
the Soyuz an extra push,
and the docking mechanism ensures capture.
<<Standing by for contact.>>
<<Contact.>>
<<Mechanical capture.>>
<<And contact and capture confirmed.>>
[PARMITANO] I think this
is where the impact was.
So I would say about four
to five inches off-centre.
Pretty good after traveling
for a couple million miles!
[DE WINNE] The probe retracts, and you get
the two vehicles closer to each other,
and then when they are
very close to each other,
less than two to three millimetres,
the hooks start closing.
And it's when these hooks are fully
closed that can take an enormous pressure
because they can withstand 16
tonnes of force, each of the hooks,
and you have eight hooks
on the Soyuz vehicle.
[NESPOLI] This is still not enough, because
there might be something inside the O-rings,
some dirt or some debris, that
is not allowing for a good seal.
So there is a series of
vacuum and depressurisations
done in a very astute manner
that verifies that each one of these
compartments is actually sealed tight.
Only at that point -- and by
the way, all of this takes
I would say an hour, one to two hours.
Only then when everything is
proved to be fully sealed,
only then you can open the hatch of
the Station, the hatch of the Soyuz,
and the crew can actually
go into the Station.
[PARMITANO] And what we
usually do is we knock
on the hatch that goes on the
side of the Space Station,
they knock back; we know that there
is somebody else on the other side
<<And the hatches between
the Soyuz spacecraft
and the International Space Station
opening at 11:14 PM Central Time.>>
[PARMITANO] Then it's hugs and
smiles for everybody.
The astronauts are now safely on-board
the International Space Station,
their home for the next six months.